---
title: '2022: A Year of Hope'
author: Rishikesh
 
date: 2022-02-21T12:10:49+00:00
excerpt: "Learning from the mistakes from the past, I decided to create a proper plan for 2022, something which I've never done in the past 27 years of my life."
url: /2022-planning/
featured_image: /wp-content/uploads/2022/02/2022-1200x800.jpg
ssb_old_counts:
  - 'a:5:{s:7:"twitter";i:0;s:9:"pinterest";i:0;s:7:"fbshare";i:0;s:6:"reddit";i:0;s:6:"tumblr";N;}'
ssb_cache_timestamp:
  - 462785
categories:
  - Life
  - Plan
  
hiddenInHomeList: true

---
<p class="has-drop-cap">
  2021 was a crazy year by all means. Learning from the mistakes from the past, I decided to create a proper plan for 2022, something which I&#8217;ve never done in the past<a href="https://rishikeshs.com/27-lessons/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener" title=" 27 years of my life"> 27 years of my life</a>. Even though I love working on different goals or projects at the same time, this can often be hectic and quite inefficient. The idea here is to create a plan for 2022 so that I have a clear vision of the things I&#8217;m pursuing. I do not plan to take up anything extra other than I&#8217;ve mentioned in this plan. This planning also will act as a skeleton for the long-form article that I&#8217;m working on revolving around the concept of &#8216;How to Live&#8217;. The overall vision for 2022 is to achieve the goals that are defined based on the three focus points I have for the year: Health, Career and Wealth.
</p>

## Goals {#goals}

  * To be fit and healthy by end of 2022.
  * Create alternate work streams and a passive income by the end of 2022.
  * Master programming and transition my career into a more data oriented one.

## Objectives {#objectives}

To achieve the goals mentioned in the previous section, the following objectives have been laid out. Some of these objectives are interconnected and contribute to more than one of the goals.

#### [🏋][1] Weight {#weight}

At the time of writing this post, my weight is 70 kgs, putting me in the slightly obese range on the BMI scale. I have shed close to 6kgs in the last month, but by end of 2022, **I want to achieve a target weight of 65**. I&#8217;m tracking this progress on Google Fit as well as on the Zepp app.  


#### 🛌 Sleep {#sleep}

Last year, I&#8217;ve done enough reading on the importance of sleep and it&#8217;s quite evident from the scientific literature that human beings need close 7-8 hours of sleep irrespective of what all hustle gurus say. Having a consistent sleep schedule is important as it balances the circadian rhythm. **My plan is to sleep around 11 PM every night and wake up around 6 AM every day along with a 30 min nap in the afternoon**. I would love to track my sleep, but what I&#8217;ve found is whenever I ever my fitness tracker to sleep, it&#8217;s quite uncomfortable for me to have something on my wrist while sleeping. This eventually affects my quality of sleep and I prefer not to do it. For the moment I&#8217;m tracking my sleep in my habit tracker on a google sheet! (I have a couple of ideas for developing an obstruction-free fitness tracker. If you&#8217;re someone who works in that space or would love to build one, do ping me!) 

#### 🚴Cycling {#cycling}

I rode around 3000kms in 2021 and 2022. I recently purchased a road bike and I&#8217;m planning to take cycling seriously this year. **In 2022, I plan to ride a minimum of 6000 km**. I love long-distance cycling/ randonneuring and I&#8217;m planning to compete for 200 and 300 BRMs this year. So far I&#8217;ve completed close 600+ km and I&#8217;m well on track. Follow me on <a href="https://www.strava.com/athletes/67526871" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">Strava</a> to see what I&#8217;m up to!

#### 🏃‍♂️ Running {#cycling}

I&#8217;ve always wanted to run but never committed to it. So the plan this year is to start things slowly and attain a fitness level **to participate in a half marathon event or do a virtual half marathon run by end of this year.** At the time of writing, I&#8217;m able to run 5k easily and I&#8217;m working towards my endurance on running a 10k. 

#### 🏊‍♂️ Swimming {#cycling}

I learnt proper swimming end of last year and have decided to dedicate **2 days a week to swimming**. I&#8217;m in the process of improving my form of swimming and my goal is to **attain the fitness to swim continuously for 800m this year**. Swimming is totally new for me, so I haven&#8217;t set anything ambitious here.. This training regime would allow me to gain some confidence in the open water swimming, a plan I have for 2023.

#### 🧘‍♂️Meditation {#cycling}

As Naval has said, Meditation is the art of doing nothing. I&#8217;ve been using <a href="https://wakingup.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener" title="Waking Up">Waking Up</a> by Sam Harris for meditating. Last year I logged close to 120 mindful days, accounting for a total of 2000+ minutes of meditation. The goal for 2022 is to move away from the app and **start practising unguided meditation every day for 20 minutes.** 

#### ⏲ Fasting {#cycling}

I&#8217;ve tried intermittent fasting during the second half of last year and it worked wonders for me. I love the concept of fasting and it gives me so much energy throughout the day. I love my current fasting schedule and would like to stick to the same this year ie **16/8 fasting with two 24 hours continuous** fasting in a month. So this would come around 5840 hours, but considering some buffer, I&#8217;m hoping to hit a target of at least 4500 hours of fasting by EOY. Tracking the fasting hours is tricky and I&#8217;m thinking of developing an app that works with an NFC tag for friction-free fasting. The plan is that I&#8217;ll scan an NFC tag and it will automatically note the current time indicating the start or stop of fasting. Let&#8217;s see how it pans out.

#### 🍲 Diet {#cycling}

I would like to cut on outside food more this year and preferably would love to eat from home the majority of the meals. After a lot of research on this front, my goal is to **follow a diet that contains zero added sugar, more fibre, seasonal produce, fatty fish, lean meat, least processed, colourful (means more antioxidants) and fermented** (Need to explore a bit of fermentation this year!). Also, another plan is to take a 60-day no sugar challenge in May 2022.

#### 🍺 Alcohol {#cycling}

I&#8217;ve been drinking since 2013 and consider myself a social drinker. But the last couple of months, I&#8217;ve noticed that consuming alcohol had a drastic effect on my bowel and sleeping patterns. Even a single pint of beer would cause hangover issues for me the next day and I&#8217;ve started to hate drinking during the last couple of months. The goal for this year is **to drink as little as possible with maximum hydration possible.**

#### 💻 Programming {#cycling}

I&#8217;ve always felt like I&#8217;ve missed the bus ride for programming. I&#8217;ve lived with that remorse over the year, but I&#8217;ve decided to stop complaining and master programming this year. With Web 3.0 coming, I don&#8217;t want to miss the train ride again. **The goal for this year is to learn Python, master the basics of data science and transition into a career that is oriented towards data.** At my current job I&#8217;m doing focused on energy, I deal with a lot of data and I&#8217;m in love with that. In 2023, if everything goes well, I plan to study again and do a postgraduate degree in data science. The plan is to complete the data science MOOC&#8217;s I&#8217;m doing by March 2022, and compete in some challenges on the Kaggle platform. By end of the year, I would like to create a portfolio that would help me in university admissions and job hunts.

Another goal for 2022 is to **learn to code in Javascript and write smart contracts**. With Web 3.0 coming, this is quite essential. As a first step towards it, I&#8217;m porting this blog into a fully custom static blog based on the eleventy framework. I&#8217;m midway through the project and I&#8217;m already dealing with a lot of javascript code. Moving the blog from WordPress into a static one will allow me to have more control over the blog and its performance. 

#### 🎨 Art {#cycling}

Art is something that adds purpose to my life. When I&#8217;m photographing or working on something artsy, I&#8217;m in a meditative state that I cannot explain. I created very little art in 2021, something I&#8217;m really sad about. I want to create more art in 2022. I&#8217;ve been part of a wonderful community of artists at Better Art Foundation, but I&#8217;ve never utilised my opportunities well. The goal for 2022 is to **create more art and build a portfolio of a minimum of 3 art projects.** The projects I&#8217;ve planned for 2022 are Abandoned Gods, Memoirs of an ALS Patient and an NFT Project. The NFT project is something that I&#8217;m really excited about and involves some generative art, which complements the programming goals I&#8217;ve for this year. 2023 will be the year when I will focus more of my attention on generative art using AI.

#### 📰 Newsletter {#cycling}

My newsletter <a href="https://rishikesh.substack.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener" title="10+1 Things">10+1 Things</a> exceeded my expectations and crossed 700 subs in 2021. I&#8217;m taking a break from writing the newsletter in January, but plan to restart it in February. **The goal for 2022 is to hit 2000 subscribers by end of the year.** The newsletter is a key part of my journey as it documents my learning, but also provides an audience for discovery. Moreover, I&#8217;m happy to create a community of like-minded individuals through the newsletter. I&#8217;m looking for cross-promotion opportunities heavily this year to achieve my goal, so if you&#8217;re someone who is writing a newsletter, feel free to ping me. 

#### ✍️ Blogging {#cycling}

I would love to write more articles on this blog this year. As I&#8217;m writing this I have got a list of 75+ ideas that are worth exploring. I&#8217;m aiming to finish 2022 by publishing **a minimum of 30 original blog posts**. Also, a lot of sections on this blog are not updated, something I&#8217;m working on. All these will be hosted on my blog that will be custom coded by end of this year. 

#### 📚 Reading {#cycling}

I set an ambitious target of 52 books for 2021 even though I started late in June 2021. I failed to meet the target and eventually ended 2021 with 33 books. This year I&#8217;m planning to read consistently and aim to **read a minimum of 45 books by EOY.**

#### 🎓 Theoretical Physics and Interaction Design {#cycling}

Apart from programming and other passions, I&#8217;m also pursuing theoretical physics and interaction design passively. For interaction design, I&#8217;m taking the lessons from <a href="https://www.interaction-design.org/invite?r=rishikesh-2" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener sponsored" title="Interaction Design Foundation">Interaction Design Foundation</a> and for Theoretical Physics I&#8217;m learning from the modules from <a href="https://theoreticalminimum.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener" title="Theoretical Minimum">Theoretical Minimum</a> and <a href="https://www.goodtheorist.science/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener" title="Good Theorist.">Good Theorist.</a> **The goal for 2022 is to complete <a href="https://theoreticalminimum.com/courses/classical-mechanics/2011/fall" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener" title="classical mechanics">classical mechanics</a> in theoretical physics and <a href="https://www.interaction-design.org/courses/become-a-ux-designer-from-scratch" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener sponsored" title="Become a UX Designer from Scratch on IDF. ">Become a UX Designer from Scratch on IDF. </a>**

#### 💸 Side Hustles {#cycling}

I&#8217;m earning a bit from the newsletter, but it&#8217;s not really much to support me as a creator. By end of the year, I plan to **generate a minimum of 50000 INR (~ $670) per month from the side hustles**. The primary income streams would be from sponsorships from [10+1 Things][2], freelancing on Fiverr and a course/product I&#8217;m creating for newsletter writers. 

#### 💰 Emergency Fund {#cycling}

One of the biggest mistakes of 2021 was travelling irresponsibly without thinking about an emergency fund. Emergency funds are critical and give everyone a cushion when an unexpected situation appears. I aim to **create an emergency fund by end of this year that will support me for at least 6 months in case of an emergency**. 

#### 💰 Portfolio Risk Management {#cycling}

I started investing even before I had an emergency fund which is a blunder because of FOMO. Also as I&#8217;m writing this 35% of my portfolio is in Cryptocurrency which is a huge risk considering the taxation the Indian government is imposing. I would like **to minimize my crypto investments to 20% of my portfolio and allocate more debt instruments into my portfolio to reduce risks.** Ideally, I want my portfolio to be 30% Indian and US equities, 40% debt/ index funds, 20% crypto and 10% as cash.

#### 💭 Other Objectives {#cycling}

Apart from these main objectives, some other objectives are to increase my earning potential, relocate to Europe with my partner and create a lifestyle that is sustainable in the long run. But these are all interconnected and I don&#8217;t really have a clear picture of those at the time of writing this article. For example, if I achieve my career goals in programming and blogging, I would definitely have a higher income potential, which will open up opportunities to relocate to anywhere in Europe.  
  
Contrary to the last couple of years, I plan to travel very less this year. Considering the financial, health and career goals I have set for this year, it would be very unsustainable to travel for long this year. and hence it never made the list of goals this year. The only travel I would be doing this year will be to Dubai, where my partner is located and a couple of local treks in Kerala, India where I&#8217;m currently based in. 

Another goal or project I&#8217;ve in my mind is to set up a business for my mother ( ideally related to food), something that will keep her engaged. I also would love to improve the front yard garden we have and build a small vegetable garden for seasonal vegetables. At the time of writing, I&#8217;m in process of setting up a drip irrigation system for watering and a herbal garden. But these are projects that are very low on my priority list and something I do to take my mind off from my usual routine. Let&#8217;s see how it pans out in 2022.

## Final Thoughts {#final-thoughts}

A wise man once said to me that you should always have a plan irrespective of the timeline or date. I may or may not achieve these goals by end of 2022. But what this plan gives me is a perspective for the whole year and some focus on things I need to work on, End of 2022, I will update you on the status of all these objectives I&#8217;ve with a year-end review. I&#8217;ve tried to kept this plan as realistic as possible, but due to the fascinating brains we have, I may have overestimated the things I can achieve in 12 months. Contrary to the popular notion to focus on one thing, I love to work on multiple things in parallel. This can be inefficient at times, but according to me, the magic happens at the intersection of these wild pursuits. I thrive on those aha moments and can&#8217;t wait to experience them!

<pre class="wp-block-preformatted"><em><strong>Enjoyed this article? If so, check out my <a href="https://rishikesh.substack.com/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">10+1 Things</a> Newsletter that I send out every Sunday. It contains 11 interesting Things I thought were worth sharing including books,articles, projects, and other things I'm curious about. <a href="https://rishikeshs.com/newsletter/" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">Click here </a>if you would like to check out the previous issues and may be subscribe! </strong></em></pre>

 [1]: https://emojikeyboard.org/copy/Person_Lifting_Weights_Emoji_%F0%9F%8F%8B?utm_source=extlink
 [2]: http://rishikesh.substack.com/ "10+1 Things"